DOC Improve the mathematical description of Logistic Regression (#22382)
scikit-learn/scikit-learn: doc/modules/linear_model.rst

    that it improves numerical stability. No regularization amounts to
    setting C to a very high value.

Binary Case
-----------

For notational ease, we assume that the target :math:`y_i` takes values in the
set :math:`\{0, 1\}` for data point :math:`i`.
Once fitted, the ``predict_proba`` method of ``LogisticRegression`` predicts
the probability of the positive class math:`P(y_i=1|X_i)` as

.. math:: \hat{p}(X_i) = \operatorname{expit}(X_i w + w_0) = \frac{1}{1 + \exp(-X_i w - w_0)}.

As an optimization problem, binary
class logistic regression with regularization term :math:`r(w)`  minimizes the
following cost function:

> .. math:: \min_{w} + C \sum_{i=1}^n \left[-y_i \log(\hat{p}(X_i)) - (1 - y_i) \log(1 - \hat{p}(X_i))\right] + r(w).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. math:: \min_{w} C \sum_{i=1}^n \left[-y_i \log(\hat{p}(X_i)) - (1 - y_i) \log(1 - \hat{p}(X_i))\right] + r(w).
```

> We currently provide four choices for the regularization term

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We currently provide four choices for the regularization term:
```

Multinomial Case
----------------

The binary case can be extended to :math:`K` classes leading to the multinomial logistic regression, see also `log-linear model
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multinomial_logistic_regression#As_a_log-linear_model>`_.

.. note::
   It is possible to parameterize a :math:`K`-class classification model
   using only :math:`K-1` weight vectors, leaving one class probability fully
   determined by the other class probabilities by leveraging the fact that all
   class probabilities must sum to one. We deliberately choose to overparameterize the model
   using :math:`K` weight vectors for ease of implementation and to preserve the
   symmetrical inductive bias regarding ordering of classes, see [1]. This effect becomes
   especially important when using regularization.

Let :math:`y_i \in {0, \ldots, K-1}` be the label (ordinal) encoded target variable for observation :math:`i`.
Instead of a single coefficient vector, we now have
a matrix of coefficients :math:`W` where each row vector :math:`w_k` corresponds to class
:math:`k`. We aim at predicting the class probabilities :math:`P(y_i=k|X_i)` via ``predict_proba`` as:

> .. math:: \hat{p}_k(X_i) = \frac{\exp(X_i w_k + w_{0, k})}{\sum_{l=0}^{K-1} \exp(X_i w_l + w_{0, l})}.

Author: I believe the transpose is accidental and a symptom of when I originally regarded `W_i` as a _column vector_ -- now removed and fixed, thanks!

    that it improves numerical stability. No regularization amounts to
    setting C to a very high value.

Binary Case
-----------

For notational ease, we assume that the target :math:`y_i` takes values in the
set :math:`\{0, 1\}` for data point :math:`i`.
Once fitted, the ``predict_proba`` method of ``LogisticRegression`` predicts

> the probability of the positive class math:`P(y_i=1|X_i)` as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the probability of the positive class :math:`P(y_i=1|X_i)` as
```

| `ElasticNet`   | :math:`\frac{1 - \rho}{2}w^T w + \rho \|w\|_1`  |
+----------------+-------------------------------------------------+

For ElasticNet, :math:`\rho` (which corresponds to the `l1_ratio` parameter)
controls the strength of :math:`\ell_1` regularization vs. :math:`\ell_2`
regularization. Elastic-Net is equivalent to :math:`\ell_1` when
:math:`\rho = 1` and equivalent to :math:`\ell_2` when :math:`\rho=0`.

Multinomial Case
----------------

The binary case can be extended to :math:`K` classes leading to the multinomial
logistic regression, see also `log-linear model
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multinomial_logistic_regression#As_a_log-linear_model>`_.

.. note::
   It is possible to parameterize a :math:`K`-class classification model
   using only :math:`K-1` weight vectors, leaving one class probability fully
   determined by the other class probabilities by leveraging the fact that all
   class probabilities must sum to one. We deliberately choose to overparameterize the model
   using :math:`K` weight vectors for ease of implementation and to preserve the
   symmetrical inductive bias regarding ordering of classes, see [16]_. This effect becomes

>    especially important when using regularization.

Reviewer: Maybe we should add that this is a bad choice for unpenalized models!

Author: Added a small addition to the note

Let :math:`y_i \in {1, \ldots, K}` be the label (ordinal) encoded target variable for observation :math:`i`.
Instead of a single coefficient vector, we now have
a matrix of coefficients :math:`W` where each row vector :math:`W_k` corresponds to class
:math:`k`. We aim at predicting the class probabilities :math:`P(y_i=k|X_i)` via ``predict_proba`` as:

.. math:: \hat{p}_k(X_i) = \frac{\exp(X_i W_k + W_{0, k})}{\sum_{l=0}^{K-1} \exp(X_i W_l + W_{0, l})}.

The objective for the optimization becomes

.. math:: \min_W -C \sum_{i=1}^n \sum_{k=0}^{K-1} [y_i = k] \log(\hat{p}_k(X_i)) + r(W).

Where :math:`[P]` represents the Iverson bracket which evaluates to :math:`0`

> if :math:`P` is false, otherwise it evaluates to :math:`1`. We currently provide fourchoices

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if :math:`P` is false, otherwise it evaluates to :math:`1`. We currently provide four choices
```

    that it improves numerical stability. No regularization amounts to
    setting C to a very high value.

Binary Case
-----------

For notational ease, we assume that the target :math:`y_i` takes values in the
set :math:`\{0, 1\}` for data point :math:`i`.

> Once fitted, the ``predict_proba`` method of ``LogisticRegression`` predicts

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once fitted, the :meth:`~sklearn.linear_model.LogisticRegression.predict_proba` method of :class:`~sklearn.linear_model.LogisticRegression` predicts
```

----------------

The binary case can be extended to :math:`K` classes leading to the multinomial
logistic regression, see also `log-linear model
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multinomial_logistic_regression#As_a_log-linear_model>`_.

.. note::
   It is possible to parameterize a :math:`K`-class classification model
   using only :math:`K-1` weight vectors, leaving one class probability fully
   determined by the other class probabilities by leveraging the fact that all
   class probabilities must sum to one. We deliberately choose to overparameterize the model
   using :math:`K` weight vectors for ease of implementation and to preserve the
   symmetrical inductive bias regarding ordering of classes, see [16]_. This effect becomes
   especially important when using regularization. The choice of overparameterization can be
   detrimental for unpenalized models since then the solution may not be unique, as shown in [16]_.

Let :math:`y_i \in {1, \ldots, K}` be the label (ordinal) encoded target variable for observation :math:`i`.
Instead of a single coefficient vector, we now have
a matrix of coefficients :math:`W` where each row vector :math:`W_k` corresponds to class

> :math:`k`. We aim at predicting the class probabilities :math:`P(y_i=k|X_i)` via ``predict_proba`` as:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:math:`k`. We aim at predicting the class probabilities :math:`P(y_i=k|X_i)` via :meth:`~sklearn.linear_model.LogisticRegression.predict_proba` as:
```

the class probability of

.. math:: P(y_i=1|X_i) = \operatorname{expit}(X_i^T w + w_0) = \frac{1}{1 + \exp(-X_i^T w - w_0)}.

As an optimization problem, binary
class logistic regression with regularization term :math:`r(w)`  minimizes the
following cost function:

.. math:: \min_{w, c} r(w) + C \sum_{i=1}^n \left[-y_i P(y_i=1|X_i)) - (1 - y_i) \log(1 - P(y_i=1|X_i))\right].

Multinomial Case

We currently implement four choices of regularization term

#. None, :math:`r(w) = 0`
#. :math:`\ell_1,\, r(w) = \|w\|_1`
#. :math:`\ell_2,\, r(w) = \frac{1}{2}\|w\|_2^2 = \frac{1}{2}w^T w`
#. ElasticNet, :math:`r(w) = \frac{1 - \rho}{2}w^T w + \rho \|w\|_1`

For ElasticNet, :math:`\rho` (which corresponds to the `l1_ratio` parameter)
controls the strength of :math:`\ell_1` regularization vs. :math:`\ell_2`
regularization. Elastic-Net is equivalent to :math:`\ell_1` when
:math:`\rho = 1` and equivalent to :math:`\ell_2` when :math:`\rho=0`.

----------------

The binary case can be extended to :math:`K`-classes leading to the multinomial logistic regression, see also `log-linear model
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multinomial_logistic_regression#As_a_log-linear_model>`_.

.. note::

>    It is possible in a :math:`K`-class context to parameterize the model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   It is possible to parameterize a :math:`K`-class classification model
```

   using only :math:`K-1` weight vectors, leaving one class probability fully
   determined by the other class probabilities by leveraging the fact that all
   class probabilities must sum to one. We deliberately choose to overparameterize the model
   using :math:`K` weight vectors for ease of implementation and to preserve the

>    symmetrical inductive bias regarding ordering of classes, see [1].. This effect becomes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   symmetrical inductive bias regarding ordering of classes, see [1]. This effect becomes
```
The reference [1] is missing. And it must get a different number (5). Then, all following references must be incremented.

   especially important when using regularization.

> Let :math:`y_i \in {0, \ldots, K-1}` be the label (ordinal) encoded target variable for observation $i$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let :math:`y_i \in {0, \ldots, K-1}` be the label (ordinal) encoded target variable for observation :math:`i`.
```

Instead of a single coefficient vector, we now have
a matrix of coefficients :math:`W` where each row vector :math:`w_k` corresponds to class

> :math:`k`. We aim at predicting the class probabilities via ``predict_proba`` as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:math:`k`. We aim at predicting the class probabilities :math:`P(y_i=k|X_i)` via ``predict_proba`` as:
```

> .. math:: p(y_i=k|X_i) = \frac{\exp(X_i w_k + w_{0, k})}{\sum_{l=0}^{K-1} \exp(X_i w_l + w_{0, l})}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. math:: \hat{p}_k(X_i) = \frac{\exp(X_i w_k + w_{0, k})}{\sum_{l=0}^{K-1} \exp(X_i w_l + w_{0, l})}.
```

> .. math:: \min_W r(W) - C\sum_{i=1}^n \sum_{k=0}^{K-1} [y_i = k] \log  p(y_i=k|X_i).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The objective for the optimization becomes

.. math:: \min_W -C \sum_{i=1}^n \sum_{k=0}^{K-1} [y_i = k] \log(p_k(X_i)) + r(W).
```

We currently implement four choices of regularization term

#. None, :math:`r(W) = 0`
#. :math:`\ell_1,\, r(W) = \|W\|_1`
#. :math:`\ell_2,\, r(W) = \frac{1}{2}\|W\|_F^2 = \frac{1}{2}sum_{i=1}^n\sum_{j=1}^K w_{i,j}^2`

> #. ElasticNet, :math:`r(W) = \frac{1 - \rho}{2}\|W\|_F^2 + \rho \|W\|_1`

Author: I'm not certain either -- should we just leave it as-is for now and potentially revisit later?

> #. ElasticNet, :math:`r(W) = \frac{1 - \rho}{2}\|W\|_F^2 + \rho \|W\|_1`

Author: @lorentzenchr Looks like the documentation for `sag_solver` references `\|W\|_F` and `\|W\|_1` so I suppose it is just the 1-norm, not the 21-norm? Unless that's a potential inconsistency in the `sag_solver` docstring. Thoughts?

> #. ElasticNet, :math:`r(W) = \frac{1 - \rho}{2}\|W\|_F^2 + \rho \|W\|_1`

Reviewer 3: I'll trust docs:

https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/blob/45a17624bf8311cf3177dffbfc7fd2d429005846/sklearn/linear_model/_sag.py#L150-L152

For reference, the original author reviewed the PR that added the docstring: https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/pull/10172

> #. ElasticNet, :math:`r(W) = \frac{1 - \rho}{2}\|W\|_F^2 + \rho \|W\|_1`

Reviewer: `W` is a matrix, so it should be a matrix norm and I doubt that it is `|W|_q`, i.e. the maximum over the row absolute values, see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matrix_norm.

> #. ElasticNet, :math:`r(W) = \frac{1 - \rho}{2}\|W\|_F^2 + \rho \|W\|_1`

Reviewer 3: By looking though the code and seeing beta influences the weight:

https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/blob/3578a9f9825514d3bfd2f2448bf4e0f95326b938/sklearn/linear_model/_sag_fast.pyx.tp#L473-L475

https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/blob/3578a9f9825514d3bfd2f2448bf4e0f95326b938/sklearn/linear_model/_sag_fast.pyx.tp#L636-L637

https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/blob/3578a9f9825514d3bfd2f2448bf4e0f95326b938/sklearn/linear_model/_sag_fast.pyx.tp#L207

This is soft thresholding for L1 loss: `sign(w) * max(abs(w) - shrinkage, 0)`. I do not think this soft thresholding would come out of `|W_{21}|`. I suspect this comes from `|W|_{11}` and it is treating `W` as a `n_classes * n_features` vector. (Although, I did not do the math.)

XREF: [Some notes](https://aswani.ieor.berkeley.edu/teaching/SP15/265/lecture_notes/ieor265_lec6.pdf) I found on soft thresholding.

> #. ElasticNet, :math:`r(W) = \frac{1 - \rho}{2}\|W\|_F^2 + \rho \|W\|_1`

Author: Would it be okay to leave this issue ongoing and potentially resolve in a follow-up PR? This PR already has significant changes/improvements from the current docs and this discussion may end up being a bit involved.

> #. ElasticNet, :math:`r(W) = \frac{1 - \rho}{2}\|W\|_F^2 + \rho \|W\|_1`

Reviewer 4: I would think it's the || W ||_{11} norm but I am not sure either. @agramfort or @arthurmensch can probably confirm this.

    that it improves numerical stability. No regularization amounts to
    setting C to a very high value.

Binary Case
-----------

For notational ease, we assume that the target :math:`y_i` takes values in the
set :math:`\{-1, 1\}` at trial :math:`i`. As an optimization problem, binary
class logistic regression using :math:`r(w)` regularization minimizes the
following cost function:

.. math:: \min_{w, c} r(w) + C \sum_{i=1}^n \log(\exp(- y_i (X_i^T w + c)) + 1) .

Multinomial Case
----------------

We may then extend logistic regression to obtain a multinomial estimator by
considering the logistic regression as a `log-linear model
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multinomial_logistic_regression#As_a_log-linear_model>`_.

.. note::
   It is possible in a :math:`K`-class context to parameterize the model
   using only :math:`K-1` weight vectors, leaving one class probability fully
   determined by the other class probabilities by leveraging the fact that all
   class probabilities must sum to one. We choose to overparameterize the model
   using :math:`K` weight vectors for ease of implementation and to preserve the

>    symmetrical inductive bias regarding ordering of classes. This effect becomes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   symmetrical inductive bias regarding ordering of classes, see [1].. This effect becomes
```
And further down:
```   
   Reference
    ---------
    .. [1] Simon, Noah, J. Friedman and T. Hastie.
        "A Blockwise Descent Algorithm for Group-penalized Multiresponse and
        Multinomial Regression."
        https://arxiv.org/pdf/1311.6529.pdf
```

Reviewer: The reference is still missing.

   especially important when using regularization.

> Let :math:`J_i` be a binary vector with a :math:`0` for every element except
> for element :math:`i`. In the multinomial context with :math:`K`-many classes,
> we define the target vector of :math:`X_n` as :math:`Y_n=J_t` where :math:`t`
> is the true class of :math:`X_n`. Instead of a single weight vector, we now have
> a matrix of weights :math:`W` where each vector :math:`W_k` corresponds to class
> :math:`k`. Then we can define the evidence vector :math:`z_n` component-wise as:
> 
> .. math:: p(Y_n=J_k|X_n) = z_{n,k} = \frac{\exp (W_k^T X_n)}{\sum_j \exp (W_j^T X_n)}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let :math:`y_i \in {0, \ldots, K-1}` be the label (ordinal) encoded target variable for observation $i$.
Instead of a single coefficient vector, we now have
a matrix of coefficients :math:`W` where each row vector :math:`w_k` corresponds to class
:math:`k`. We aim at predicting the class probabilities via ``predict_proba`` as:

.. math:: p(y_i=k|X_i) = \frac{\exp(X_i w_k + w_{0, k})}{\sum_{l=0}^{K-1} \exp(X_i w_l + w_{0, l})}
```

> Then the multinomial logistic regression solves this
> optimization problem:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finding the weight matrix $W$ corresponds to solving the following
optimization problem:
```

> .. math:: \min_W r(W) - C\sum_n Y_n^T z_n

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. math:: \min_W r(W) - C\sum_{i=1}^n \sum_{k=0}^{K-1} (y_i = k) \log  p(y_i=k|X_i)
```

.. note::

   In the multinomial case, the regularization function internally flattens the
   matrix of weights into a vector. This is equivalent to concatenating each
   individual :math:`W_k` vector. Thus, for a matrix :math:`W`, using
   :math:`\ell_2` regularization is equivalent to taking the Frobenius norm:
   :math:`r(W) = \|W\|_F`

> Regularization

Reviewer: I would put this part directly in the subsection "Binary Case". And a similiar one in the Multinomial Case where the norms differ. I think it's the Frobienius norm instead of L2 and "||W||_{21}" as in Multi-task Lasso.

+================+==================================================================================+
| `None`         | :math:`0`                                                                        |
+----------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

> | :math:`\ell_1` | :math:`\|W\|_{1,1} = \sum_{i,j}|W_{i,j}|`                                        |

Reviewer 5: for consistency with the line below put the values of the bounds for the sum. 1 to n and 0 to K-1 although I have no clue why it starts at 1 for i and 0 for j. I would start at 1 for both to stick to maths notations.

    .. [9] `"Performance Evaluation of Lbfgs vs other solvers"
            <http://www.fuzihao.org/blog/2016/01/16/Comparison-of-Gradient-Descent-Stochastic-Gradient-Descent-and-L-BFGS/>`_

>     .. [16] Simon, Noah, J. Friedman and T. Hastie.
>         "A Blockwise Descent Algorithm for Group-penalized Multiresponse and
>         Multinomial Regression."
>         https://arxiv.org/pdf/1311.6529.pdf

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    .. [16] :arxiv:`Simon, Noah, J. Friedman and T. Hastie.
        "A Blockwise Descent Algorithm for Group-penalized Multiresponse and
        Multinomial Regression." <1311.6529>`
```
